---  
# required metadata  
title: FastTrack Roleguide - Soft Skills
description: FastTrack Roleguide - Soft Skills
author: Mark Eichenberger
ms.author: mareich
manager: eduardod  
ms.date: 2/18/2019  
ms.topic: playbook  
ms.prod: non-product-specific  
ms.custom: internal-playbook  
ft.audience: internal  
ft.owner: mareich
---  
[!INCLUDE [Playbook Feedback](./includes/questions-feedback.md)]
 
# Situational Awareness - Soft Skills & Negotiation Skills

## Overview
### Communication

Great communication skills are critical in every aspect of the role.
Whether it's communicating with your leadership, fellow colleagues or
those you're working with, effective and efficient communication will
help ensure your seen as competent.

### Listening

Always be a great and proactive listener through all stages of the
engagement. Otherwise, you're likely missing half of the equation or
conversation, when plans are being formulated or challenges being
shared, thus focus.

### Clarifying

Always clarify statements and ask for supporting facts to substantiate
asks as needed and clarify those back to the customer, never over commit
but agree to follow-up.

### Confidence & Motivation

Demonstrate confidently and motivate those around you to be the same,
and especially those that are key to moving the program forward.
Motivators don't pressure people to do, they inspire them to do their
best.

### Delegation

Understand how to delegate tasks to others and hold them accountable
this maximizes the efficiencies of the team.

## Negotiation Skills
### Preparation to negotiate

Before any meetings occur, a decision needs to be taken as to when and
where a meeting will take place to discuss the challenge / problem and
who will attend. Setting a time limited meeting is helpful to prevent
any potential disagreements continuing past a point.

This involves ensuring all the pertinent facts of the situation are
known in order to clarify your own position or represent that of
Microsoft. This includes knowing our M365 "products", "capabilities" and
'compliance' within Microsoft and how FastTrack supports them.

Undertaking preparation before discussing any challenge or approaches
with customers will help to avoid further conflicts or unnecessarily
create unneeded churn, during the meeting or subsequent follow-up
meetings.

### Discussion

Every individual or members of each side put forward the case as they
see it, i.e. their understanding of the situation, learn to see the
others perspective and demonstrate customer empathy, but equally convey
our experience.

Key soft skills during this include questioning, listening and
clarifying.

Sometimes it is helpful to take notes during the discussion stage to
record all points put forward in case there is need for further
clarification. It is extremely important to listen, as when disagreement
takes place it is easy to make the mistake of saying too much and
listening too little. Each side should have an equal opportunity to
present their case.

### Clarifying Goals

From the discussion, the goals, interests and viewpoints of both sides
of the disagreement need to be clarified.

It is helpful to list these factors in order of priority. Through this
clarification it is often possible to identify or establish some common
ground. Clarification is an essential part of the negotiation process,
without this, misunderstandings are likely to occur which may cause
problems and barriers to reach a beneficial outcome.

### Negotiate Towards a Win-Win Outcome for all

Focus on what is termed a \'win-win\' outcome where both sides feel they
have gained something positive through the process of negotiation and
both sides feel their point of view has been taken into consideration.

A win-win outcome is usually the best result. Although this may not
always be possible, through negotiation, it should be the goal.

Suggestions of alternative strategies and compromises need to be
considered at this point. Compromises are often positive alternatives
which can often achieve greater benefit for all concerned compared to
holding to the original positions.

### Agreement

Agreement can be achieved once understanding of both sides' viewpoints
and interests have been considered.

It is essential to for everybody involved to keep an open mind in order
to achieve an acceptable solution. Any agreement needs to be made
perfectly clear so that both sides know what has been decided and Next
Steps.

### Implementing a Course of Action for outcomes

From the agreement, a course of action must be implemented to carry
through the decision.

### Failure to Agree or agree on Next Steps

If the process of negotiation breaks down and agreement cannot be
reached, then re-schedule a further meeting. This avoids all parties
becoming embroiled in heated discussion or argument with all persons
reluctant to change, which not only wastes time but can also damage
future relationships.

Planning for a subsequent meeting, can involve inviting other SME or
other to mediate, if needed negotiation should be repeated. Any new
ideas or interests should be considered including Facts and the
situation looked at again with a fresh perspective, it can be useful to
explain or look at other alternative solutions / approaches to achieve
the same and/or bring in another person to mediate, who has experience
such as a SME.

### Informal Negotiation

There are times when there is a need to negotiate more informally. At
such times, when a difference of opinion arises, it might not be
possible or appropriate to go through the stages set out above in a
formal manner.

Nevertheless, remembering the key points in the stages of formal
negotiation may be very helpful in a variety of informal situations.

In any negotiation, the following three elements are important and
likely to affect the ultimate outcome of the negotiation:


### Attitudes

All negotiation is strongly influenced by underlying attitudes to the
process itself, for example attitudes to the issues and personalities
involved in the particular case or attitudes linked to personal needs
for recognition.

Always be aware that:

Communication and Negotiation is not an arena for the realization of
individual achievements, instead careful listening and conveying
guidance vs building a perception of attitude.

There can be resentment of the need to negotiate by those in authority.

Certain features of negotiation may influence a person's behavior, for
example some people may become defensive, avoid this at all costs.

### Knowledge

The more knowledge you possess of the issues in question, the greater
your participation in the process of negotiation and successful outcome
In other words, good preparation is essential, this includes seeking
support the of others from Subject Matter Experts, Colleagues or
Leadership to help guide you to build better insight and responses.

## Ways to Influence and Persuade

### Repetitive

We all know people who aim to persuade by talking constantly. They seem
to think they can grind others into submission, by simply reiterating
their point of view constantly. This, basically, is nagging. And it does
sometimes work, of course, because their colleagues or family give in
solely to get some peace. But as a general rule, others persuaded in
this way probably haven't bought into the idea, and are not committed to
it.

This means that when the going gets tough, the idea could easily just
wither and die.

### Coercion

Others fall back on the power of their position, and order others to do
what they want. This, in its most unpleasant sense, is coercion. Again,
their family or colleagues won't necessarily like what they're doing. If
it's hard, they may well give up. More orders will be issued, to rescue
the idea, but again, may be unsuccessful, because those involved are
doing it because they have to, not because they want to.

### A Better Way

The 'FT Holy Grail' of persuasion, is to get others to buy into the
idea, who are supportive and want to do it your way. And the best way of
achieving that is in a way that others don't notice. But how?

The key skills for successful persuasion, are pretty wide. First of all,
successful persuaders tend to have high self-esteem and good Emotional
Intelligence more generally. They really believe that they will succeed,
this is having and retaining a positive attitude to even at the most
difficult of times.

Always remain motivated and believe in yourself the solution and what we
do in FT and how we can help customers.

Additionally, understand who your customer us and who the audience is
and how they think.

Key skills here include Customer Empathy, and good Listening Skills,
including being an Active Listener (don't just sit on a call or be in
the corner of a meeting) participate. If you listen, your audience will
tell you what they are thinking, solicit the information, by asking
questions but acknowledging participants. It also build a rapport; by
listening and asking questions, people gravitate towards those who take
time to establish or become a friendly, as well as act as an influencer.

Were all human and we'd all much rather do what a friend suggests vs
someone we dislike or because they are in a position of authority,
however sensible the idea. Building rapport helps to build trust.

Good persuaders or influencers have very good Listening and
Communication Skills.

It's essential that you can get your point across succinctly and
effectively, otherwise you're never going to persuade anyone of the
merits of your position.

The final soft skill of great persuaders is being organized. They do
their homework upfront, they know their audience and they know their
subject, even if they require others to provide detail. They have taken
time to organise themselves and others to think about what they want to
achieve as the outcome.

## Recommended training

[Soft Skills courses at LinkedIn
Learning](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/search?entityType=COURSE&keywords=soft%20skills)

[Master In-Demand Professional Soft
Skills](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/paths/master-in-demand-professional-soft-skills)


